---
title: My Homelab! Pt. 2
date: 2024-12-09
description: What do you actually run on the hardware? Why bother blowing through those watts?
draft: 'false'
---

## The parts we're missing

Oh boy is there many. Modern cloud providers give you so much in the out of the box K8s offerings that the average user takes for granted. Monitoring alone is such a behemoth that setting it up properly across the cluster could eat a weekend. I've got a list here that I'd love to actually get implemented:

- Drive health alerts
  - Martha, despite falling victim to this recently, has no external alerts for the [SMART health](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-Monitoring%2C_Analysis_and_Reporting_Technology) of her drives. I'd be nice to get a bit of a warning other than the GPU jobs failing.
- Aggregated logging / metrics
  - I have [prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) running, and some of my services are set up there but I'm not taking advantage of it to the level I'd like. It would be great to at least have some metrics about the number of visits to my websites that run in the cluster. Integrating InfluxDB + [Telegraf](https://github.com/influxdata/telegraf)
- Centralized Authentication
  - Every service has it's own username and password, and they're all unique and random. While it's fine for me with my password manager, I'd love to give my users a central login for services I give them access to, and have a central place to revoke it all.
- Network intrusion detection
  - This is something I'm somewhat paranoid about. The last thing I want is someone on my network, snooping around. I've done the basic separate VLANs for the cluster and IoT stuff, but it would be great to have something like [Suricata](https://github.com/OISF/suricata?tab=readme-ov-file) actively monitoring. Though that'll probably just give me a false sense of security.
- A better, auto updating homepage
  - I use Dashy right now to list out some services, but they have to be manually added and linked. It would be great to have something the reads the ingress routes in the cluster and builds out the dashboard for each of them.
  - This probably should tie into my monitoring dashboard as well, having it all in one place would be great.
- Calibre server
  - I use Calibre to manage my books and I run it off my desktop whenever needed, but it would be great to access my books from anywhere without manually ssh'ing through.
